Code Book 
================


### Final Tidy Data
In "finaltidydata", there are  86 (NOT including 'subject' and 'activity') of the original 561 variables given in the raw data ("x_test.txt" and "x_train.txt"). The 88 variables are the mean or standard deviation columns (let's call this data frame "subset-df"). 
"Subset-df" was grouped by activity and subject. For every combination of activity (m=6) and subject (n=30), we calculated the average of those 88 variables. Our tidy data therefore contains 180 observations/rows (of the original 10299 rows) and 88 variables/columns. 


###Notation and Units 
* '-XYZ' is used to denote 3-axial signals in the X, Y and Z directions. There are actually 3 variables for each row listed. 
* prefix 't' to denote time domain signals
* 'f' to indicate frequency domain signals (FFT was applied to them) 

### Variables (n=88) in the Final Tidy Data
* subject - There are 30 subjects in this study
* activity - Each subject performed 6 different activities
                          
* tBodyAcc.mean - XYZ                                
* tGravityAcc.mean - XYZ  
* tBodyAccJerk.mean - XYZ  
* tBodyGyro.mean - XYZ  
* tBodyGyroJerk.mean - XYZ  
* tBodyAccMag.mean             
* tGravityAccMag.mean         
* tBodyAccJerkMag.mean            
* tBodyGyroMag.mean         
* tBodyGyroJerkMag.mean           
* fBodyAcc.mean - XYZ                      
* fBodyAcc.meanFreq - XYZ                           
* fBodyAccJerk.mean - XYZ                  
* fBodyAccJerk.meanFreq - XYZ          
* fBodyGyro.mean - XYZ            
* fBodyGyro.meanFreq - XYZ           
* fBodyAccMag.mean               
* fBodyAccMag.meanFreq             
* fBodyBodyAccJerkMag.mean        
* fBodyBodyAccJerkMag.meanFreq      
* fBodyBodyGyroMag.mean     
* fBodyBodyGyroMag.meanFreq        
* fBodyBodyGyroJerkMag.mean  
* fBodyBodyGyroJerkMag.meanFreq     
* angle.tBodyAccMean.gravity     
* angle.tBodyAccJerkMean..gravityMean
* angle.tBodyGyroMean.gravityMean
* angle.tBodyGyroJerkMean.gravityMean
* angle.X.gravityMean   
* angle.Y.gravityMean              
* angle.Z.gravityMean  
              
* tBodyAcc.std - XYZ                   
* tGravityAcc.std - XYZ  
* tBodyAccJerk.std - XYZ               
* tBodyGyro.std - XYZ               
* tBodyGyroJerk.std - XYZ               
* tBodyAccMag.std               
* tGravityAccMag.std               
* tBodyAccJerkMag.std           
* tBodyGyroMag.std               
* tBodyGyroJerkMag.std          
* fBodyAcc.std - XYZ                 
* fBodyAccJerk.std - XYZ
* fBodyGyro.std - XYZ              
* fBodyAccMag.std                 
* fBodyBodyAccJerkMag.std          
* fBodyBodyGyroMag.std             
* fBodyBodyGyroJerkMag.std



### How the Raw Dataset was Collected
The raw dataset contained 561 variables (NOT including 'subject' and 'activity'). Data was collected from 30 volunteers performing 6 different activities (WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING) while wearing a smartphone. The data was generated by the smartphone's embedded accelerometer and gyroscope. 


### How the Raw Data was Processed  
The features selected for this database come from the accelerometer and gyroscope 3-axial raw signals tAcc-XYZ and tGyro-XYZ. These time domain signals (prefix 't' to denote time) were captured at a constant rate of 50 Hz. Then they were filtered using a median filter and a 3rd order low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 20 Hz to remove noise. Similarly, the acceleration signal was then separated into body and gravity acceleration signals (tBodyAcc-XYZ and tGravityAcc-XYZ) using another low pass Butterworth filter with a corner frequency of 0.3 Hz. 

Subsequently, the body linear acceleration and angular velocity were derived in time to obtain Jerk signals (tBodyAccJerk-XYZ and tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ). Also the magnitude of these three-dimensional signals were calculated using the Euclidean norm (tBodyAccMag, tGravityAccMag, tBodyAccJerkMag, tBodyGyroMag, tBodyGyroJerkMag). 

Finally a Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) was applied to some of these signals producing fBodyAcc-XYZ, fBodyAccJerk-XYZ, fBodyGyro-XYZ, fBodyAccJerkMag, fBodyGyroMag, fBodyGyroJerkMag. (Note the 'f' to indicate frequency domain signals). 

These signals were used to estimate variables of the feature vector for each pattern:  
'-XYZ' is used to denote 3-axial signals in the X, Y and Z directions.

tBodyAcc-XYZ  
tGravityAcc-XYZ  
tBodyAccJerk-XYZ  
tBodyGyro-XYZ   
tBodyGyroJerk-XYZ  
tBodyAccMag  
tGravityAccMag  
tBodyAccJerkMag  
tBodyGyroMag  
tBodyGyroJerkMag  
fBodyAcc-XYZ    
fBodyAccJerk-XYZ  
fBodyGyro-XYZ  
fBodyAccMag  
fBodyAccJerkMag  
fBodyGyroMag  
fBodyGyroJerkMag  

The set of variables that were estimated from these signals are: 

mean(): Mean value   
std(): Standard deviation    
mad(): Median absolute deviation    
max(): Largest value in array   
min(): Smallest value in array   
sma(): Signal magnitude area   
energy(): Energy measure. Sum of the squares divided by the number of values.    
iqr(): Interquartile range   
entropy(): Signal entropy   
arCoeff(): Autorregresion coefficients with Burg order equal to 4   
correlation(): correlation coefficient between two signals   
maxInds(): index of the frequency component with largest magnitude   
meanFreq(): Weighted average of the frequency components to obtain a mean frequency  
skewness(): skewness of the frequency domain signal    
kurtosis(): kurtosis of the frequency domain signal    
bandsEnergy(): Energy of a frequency interval within the 64 bins of the FFT of each window.   
angle(): Angle between to vectors.   

Additional vectors obtained by averaging the signals in a signal window sample. These are used on the angle() variable:

gravityMean  
tBodyAccMean  
tBodyAccJerkMean  
tBodyGyroMean  
tBodyGyroJerkMean  


The complete list of variables of each feature vector is available in 'features.txt'
